#### Chapter 1



#### Chapter 2

- > P28.Q1. Why the required bandwidth of digital signal is wider then analog signal? And what is the relationship of the bandwidth and utilization rate of communication channel?

- P29.R1. Why will the bandwidth of signal limit the maximum Baud rate? The key thought of the answer is that: if we change the symbol unit too fast, then we cannot tell which frequency it wanna represent.

- > P30.Q1. How do we transform bandwidth between digital information channel and simulationary information channel? What's the relationship of them?

- P36.R1. Which means if the electric level keeps on a positive or negative level instead a quick "+"->"-" jump (or reversed), it's an invalid code, because AMI uses the jump to represent "1", which refused a long-stand electric level.

- P36.R2. This statement means to compare the AMI code which uses B6ZS and not. The usage of B6ZS makes sure that even the original code contains continuous "0", the violation can still be detected.

- P37.R1. Notice that Manchester Encoding allows the exchange between the representation of "1" and "0", while the Differential Manchester Encoding do not allow that.

    As a great application of this rule, you can try ??? as a reference.

    About the picture in P35, notice that only the electric level jump **between** two lines (which means it's happend in the middle of a time unit) are thought as coding, not including the electric level jumps happened at the end of a time unit, which gives a initial state which help to represent the direction of accepted jumps which were noticed above).

- > P41.Q1. What is the exact frequency range of human voice?

- > P41.Q2. How do we compute the bandwidth of a video signal?

#### Chapter 3

- P67.R1. Notice the slight difference between bit number of frame and the size of window. A frame got 3 bit means 2^3=8 index included, which is 0-7. But here we set the window size as 7, as a result the first sending can only includes frame indexed  by 0-6.

- P67.R2. As we know frame is the basic unit of **data-link layer**, which means it probably is generated by devided a network layer package into few small parts (or combined them), obviously it's meaningless to submit a uncompleted package to the upper layer (which can not process them), but once we submit the frame as unordered, then the package is very likely to be uncompleted.

- P68.R1. In binary coding we just need to set the size of window a bit less than the size of frame.

- P69.R1. Why does reseting the size of window into 7 (just minus 1) avoid the ambiguity?  Let's check what is changed compared to the ambiguity example above. This time the sender uses 0,1,2,3,4,5,6 as its initial state, then gets an ACK1 and push the window into state: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, then if an ACK1 arrived again, it's impossible to misunderstand it, the sender knows this ACK message can only represent the first "1" but not the coming "1", since there is still "0" between the current window and the comming "1":

    |1|2|3|4|5|6|7|0|1|

    As we know, "ACKn" means all the messages before "n" (itself is not included) are correctly received. Since it's impossible to correctly receive the following frame "0" before it is sended, "ACK1" can't represent the "1" after new "0". This concluded that it can only be interpreted as "1" is the first one in the window, which means nothing in the window is correctly received.

- P69.R2. Compared the limit of window size between Go-back-N ARQ Protocol and Seletive Repeat ARQ protocol, the common part, of course, they both limit the window size accroding to the frame bit length, why? the deep reasom is that since the bit length distributed to frame index is limited, any protocol working on the data-link layer have to solve the problem that the index will be reuse once we get to the maximum index. Here we set limit to window to make sure that the frame won't be send too fast to cause the conflict.

    But why these two protocol got differnet limit? the Seletive Repeat ARQ protocol limits window size as
    $$
    \begin{equation} \tag{3.1}
    W\leq2^{k-1}
    \end{equation}
    $$
    While the Go-back-N ARQ Protocol has a wider limit
    $$
    \begin{equation} \tag{3.2}
    W\leq2^k-1
    \end{equation}
    $$
    Where does the difference come from?

    >Question
    >
    >The difference might not be the problem of protocol, the fact is there is two problems which might accur during the communication process considered:
    >
    >1. index confilt, which caused (3.2) limit. 
    >2. ACK frame lost, which caused (3.1) limit.
    >
    >if the we consider the ACK frame lost suitation on Go-back-N ARQ protocol might also conclude (3.1) limit.

- P75.S1. Since the HDLC Protocol and X.25 PLP Protocol is now replace by PPP Protocol, there is meaningless to learn about these two protocols unless the test in recent years contain this part. Just need to know their names and know they were working on the data-link layer, that's fine.

