# 1.3 Geometric Methods

### Problem Set Part I

##### Exercise 4. 

We first explain that all integral curves from the above trapped on $m=0$ and $m=1/2$  as $x$  grows large enough. First we consider those curves which come from the above (technically, which means that $\lim_{x\rightarrow\infin}y=\infin$), Since the derivative of lines above line $y=1/2x(m=0)$ is negative, all of the curves will drop down until it approach the line m=0, and once they cross the $m=0$ line, any cannot escape from it anymore, cause which requires an U-turn which the slope field below line $m=0$ cannot provide. Thus, with the Existence and Uniqueness Theorem for ODE's appied, one cannot touch the line $y=1/2x-1/4$ as the integral curve (of course it also plays a rule as the isocline, but we use the integral curve character to apply the theorem). As a result, it must be trapped between line $m=0$ and $m=1/2$. Those curves which come from the below can be analysed in the similar way.



##### Exercise 5. 

1(above) or 0(below). For those curves come from above, they got one and only one chance to across the line $m=0$ (the reason is explain in last question), so it only got 1 critical point, and as for those curves come from below, it cannot cross the line $m=1/2$ to approach the line $m=0$, as a result those curses don't get any critical points.

If we want to reach the critical point exactly where $x=0$, we need to check where $x=0$ lies on the $m=0$ isocline, the result is $(0, 0)$, so the curve must pass point $(0,0)$, so the requested $y_0 = 0$

For those integral curves who has one critical point, noticed that before they cross line $m=0$ the slope on the field is always negative, and after across it the slope is always positive, as a result the critial point must be a minimum point.

With second derivative technical appied, we got
$$
y'' = 1-2y'
$$
When $y'=0$, this gives out that $y''=1$, always a positive value, so the zero point of $y'$ must be a negative-to-positive graph, as the result the critical point must be minimum value.



##### Exercise 8. 

$$
y^2 - x^2 = -1
$$



